54:1	Introduction: thinking	through things	1
90:We are very grateful to Giovanni Da Col, Fernando Dominguez-Rubio, Stephan Feuchtwang, Maryon Macdonald, Daniel Miller, Morten Pedersen, Nancy Ries, Anne Salmond and David Turnbull for their comments on drafts of the Introduction. Two anonymous publisher's readers provided very valuable feedback on the manuscript as a whole. Finally, we would like to express our deep gratitude to Eduardo Viveiros de Castro for his detailed commentary on drafts of most of the chapters, and for his unwavering stimulation and support throughout the writing of the volume. 
92:INTRODUCTION
98:The purpose of this introduction is to elucidate what the editors see as implicit in the contributions to this volume. While the contributors were not asked to write to a specific remit, we see in their papers a variety of attempts to sidestep habitual analytic distinctions. Instead of advancing yet more complex and ostensibly sophisticated theoretical models (piling up the assumptions as it were), each explores the peculiar mileage afforded by the ethnographic method itself What they offer collectively is the promise of a new way of approaching the often-segregated tasks of fieldwork and analysis, in short, the germ of a new methodology. With purposeful naivete, the aim of this method is to take 'things' encountered in the field as they present themselves, rather than immediately assuming that they signify, represent, or stand for something else. Adopting an approach that might be called 'radically essentialist' (see below), the papers that have been assembled here can be seen as exploring a more open, heuristic approach to analysis that allows'things', as and when they arise, to offer theoretical possibilities (and it will presently be explained why the term 'things' is considered apposite in this context).
147:While it is beyond the scope of this introduction to offer a comprehensive review of the literature in which the shift from epistemological to ontological orientations has so far been manifest, it may help to draw out aspects of the work we consider has precipitated this move. Despite the fact that Marilyn Strathem has not couched her own efforts in terms of an ontologising anthropology, we believe that such a perspective can be read back into much of her material. Indeed, while the Maussian character of Strathem's analysis of Melanesian gift-giving is well established (e.g. Graeber 2001: 37), perhaps the principal affinity of her strategy to Mauss's lies in her willingness to use Melanesian gifts as an occasion to transform analytical assumptions. In other words, if Strathem is Maussian, she is so in the ontological sense outlined above. When asking questions about the nature of 'persons' in Highland Papua New Guinea, Strathem rejects an approach that would seek merely to broaden the Anglophone concepts of 'person' and 'thing' to accommodate Melanesian data. Rather, faced with a situation in which gifts contain the gendered relations which they instantiate, she is willing to pursue the conceptual effect that such an occasion implies - to tackle the theoretical implications of the gift-as-heuristic, in other words. It is not that Melanesian gifts are also 'persons' in terms familiar to the anthropologist 一 they are not 'individuals' in terms of the 'possessive individualism' that animates Euro-American conceptualisations of what constitutes a 'person'. Rather, Strathem treats the insufficiency of 'persons' and 'things' as concepts through which to apprehend Melanesian gift-giving as an opportunity to transform those very concepts. Where a gift instantiates a social relation rather than merely being a symbolic representation of that relation, it follows that Melanesian 'persons' can no longer be conceived as existing prior to relationships in which they subsequently become implicated through exchange. Instead, Melanesian persons have to be construed as relations per se (hence Strathem's famous evocation of the 'dividual' as a 'distributed person'(1988: 13,15;1991: 53). This forces us to re-think our concept of the person, and particularly its relevance to social situations less familiar than our own. Against possessive individualism, which turns on the assumption that people are discrete entities that can enter into relations, Strathem has effectively created a new concept of the 'person' that follows Melanesians themselves in locating personhood in the relations that exchange entails.11
211:Levi-Strauss, Claude (1987) Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss (trans. F. Barker) London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
214:Miller, Daniel (2005a) 'Materiality' (introduction to edited volume) in Daniel Miller (ed.) Materiality, Durham NC and London: Duke University Press.
245:According to Klein (1995: xi), cigarettes are a crucial integer of modernity, among the most interesting and significant objects of our time. He notes that tobacco's introduction into Europe in the sixteenth century coincided with the invention and spread of printed books, the development of scientific method and a questioning of previously assured theological positions (in this Age of Anxiety, the drug became a commonly prescribed remedy)(1995: 27). Cigarettes went on to accompany workers into the mechanised factories of the Age of Industry (eventually to spread across colonial and postcolonial empires) and to be the companion of the soldier in modem war. As well as the quality of experience that smoking provides, Klein highlights its continuing symbolic and aesthetic properties, as displayed in popular media such as literature, photography and film. He points out the uses of cigarettes as instruments of communication (smoking provides a whole language of gestures and acts) and as objects of gift and trade (see Machen 1926). And finally, he connects them with histories of moral evaluation; once an act of defiance or 'cool', smoking is now frequently an occasion for guilt (1995:17). Particularly in Europe and North America, cigarettes are assigned a negative value, the object of public disapproval and government-backed economic sanction.
314:Robbins, J. and Akin, D.(1999) 'An introduction to Melanesian currencies: agency, identity and social reproduction', in Akin, D. and Robbins, J. (eds) Money and Modernity: State and Local Currencies in Melanesia, Pittsburgh PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
572:Quigley D. (2005) 'Introduction: the character of kingship', in Quigley, D. (ed.) The Character of Kingship, Oxford: Berg.
